Adding in new VTExplain in bulk user guide (#530)
vitessio/website: content/en/docs/user-guides/vtexplain-in-bulk.md

---

> title: Explaining how to analyze SQL statements in bulk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Analyzing SQL statements in bulk
```

weight: 98
---

# Introduction 

> This document covers the way our [VTexplain tool](../../reference/vtexplain) can be used to evaluate how Vitess executes many SQL statements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document covers the way our [VTexplain tool](../../reference/vtexplain) can be used to evaluate how Vitess executes multiple SQL statements. 
```

## Prerequisites

You can find a prebuilt binary version of the VTExplain tool in [the most recent release of Vitess](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/releases/).

You can also build the `vtexplain` binary in your environment. To build this binary, refer to the [Build From Source](../../contributing/build-from-source) guide.

## Overview

> To successfully analyze many SQL queries and determine how Vitess executes each statement, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To analyze multiple SQL queries and determine how Vitess executes each statement, follow these steps:
```

1. Gather the queries from your current production database
1. Filter out specific queries
1. Populate fake values for your queries
1. Run the VTexplain tool via a script

> 1. Add your SQL schema

Reviewer: This step and the next one have vague titles. Consider being more specific. E.g., "Add your SQL schema to the output file."

Author: I think I fixed it this time. For some reason I didn't see all of the changes you suggested the first time around. I made sure I got all of them this time.

1. Add your VSchema
1. Run the VTexplain tool and capture the output
1. Check your output for errors

## 1. Gather the queries from your current production database

> These queries should be most, if not all, of the queries that are sent to your current production database tracked over an extended period of time. You may need to track your sent queries for days or weeks depending on your setup. You will need to normalize the queries you will be analyzing. To do this you can use any MySAL monitoring tool like VividCortex, Monyog or PMM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These queries should be most, if not all, of the queries that are sent to your current production database tracked over an extended period of time. You may need to track your sent queries for days or weeks depending on your setup. You will need to normalize the queries you will be analyzing. To do this, you can use any MySAL monitoring tool, like VividCortex, Monyog, or PMM.
```

## 2. Filter out specific queries

> Queries that are not supported or are coming from other sources should be removed from your normalized list. A few examples of queries to remove are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove from your list any unsupported queries or queries from non-application sources. The following are examples of queries to remove:
```

> * LOCK/UNLOCK TABLES  -  These are likely coming from schema management tools, which you wouldn't want run against vtgate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* LOCK/UNLOCK TABLES  -  These likely come from schema management tools, which VTGate obviates.

> * FLUSH/PURGE LOGS  - These are likely coming from management scripts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* FLUSH/PURGE LOGS  - Vitess performs its own log management.
```

> * performance_schema queries  -  This is not supported by Vitess 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* performance_schema queries  -  These queries are not supported by Vitess.
```

> * BEGIN/COMMIT  -  These are supported, but not as stand-alone queries in vtexplain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* BEGIN/COMMIT  -  Vitess supports these statements, but VTExplain does not.
```

> An example pipeline to filter out these specific queries is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is an example pipeline to filter out these specific queries:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

cat queries.txt \
 | grep -v performance_schema \
 | grep -v information_schema \
 | grep -v @@ \
 | grep -v "SELECT ? $" \
 | grep -v "PURGE BINARY" \
 | grep -v "^SET" \
 | grep -v "^EXPLAIN" \
 | grep -v ^query \
 | grep -v ^BEGIN \
 | grep -v ^COMMIT \
 | grep -v ^FLUSH \
 | grep -v ^LOCK \
 | grep -v ^UNLOCK \
 | grep -v mysql > queries_for_vtexplain.txt
```

## 3. Populate fake values for your queries

> Once the queries are normalized in prepared statement style you will need to generate a populate fake values in order for VTExplain to run properly. An example pipeline you can run to do this is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the queries are normalized in prepared statement style, populate fake values to allow VTExplain to run properly. The following is an example pipeline you can run to populate fake values:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

cat queries.txt \
 | perl -p -e 's#\? = \?#1 = 1#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#= \?#="1"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#LIMIT \?#LIMIT 1#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\> \?#> "1"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#IN \(\?\)#IN (1)#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\? AS ONE#1 AS ONE#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#BINARY \?#BINARY \"1\"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\< \?#< "2"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#, \?#, "1"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#VALUES \(...\)#VALUES \(1,2\)#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#IN \(\.\.\.\)#IN \(1,2\)#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\- \? #\- 50 #g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#BETWEEN \? AND \?#BETWEEN 1 AND 10#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#LIKE \? #LIKE \"1\" #g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#OFFSET \?#OFFSET 1#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\?, \.\.\.#\"1\", \"2\"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\/ \? #\/ \"1\" #g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#THEN \? ELSE \?#THEN \"2\" ELSE \"3\"#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#THEN \? WHEN#THEN \"4\" WHEN#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#SELECT \? FROM#SELECT \"6\" FROM#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#SELECT \?  AS#SELECT id AS#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#\`DAYOFYEAR\` \(\?\)#DAYOFYEAR \("2020-01-20"\)#g' \
 | perl -p -e 's#YEAR \(\?\)#YEAR \("2020-01-01"\)#g' \
 | grep -v mysql > queries_for_vtexplain.txt
 ```

## 4. Run the VTExplain tool via a script

> In order to analyze every query in your list you likely will want to run a script to do this. We have an example python script below that assumes a sharded setup with 4 shards that you will need to adjust to match your individual requirements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to analyze every query in your list, create and run a script. The following is an example Python script that assumes a sharded database with 4 shards. You can adjust this script to match your individual requirements.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ cat testfull.py
for line in open("queries_for_vtexplain.txt", "r").readlines():
    sql = line.strip()
    print("vtexplain -schema-file schema.sql -vschema-file vschema.json -shards 4 -sql '%s'" % sql)
x
$ python testfull.py > run_vtexplain.sh
```

## 5. Add your SQL schema

> You will need to add your proposed SQL schema to the file created by the script (e.g. schema.sql). A very simple example SQL schema is below. You will need to create one that matches your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add your proposed SQL schema to the file created by the script (e.g. schema.sql). The following is an example SQL schema:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ cat schema.sql
CREATE TABLE `user` (
  `user_id` bigint(20) NOT NULL,
  `name` varchar(128) DEFAULT NULL,
  `balance` decimal(13,4) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`user_id`),
  KEY `balance` (`balance`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;
```

> ## 6. Add your VSchema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6. Add your VSchema to the output file
```

> You will need to add your VSchema to the file created by the script (e.g. schema.json). A very simple example VSchema to match the SQL schema is below. You will need to create one that matches your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add your VSchema to the file created by the script: in this example, the file is named `schema.json`. The following is an example VSchema to match the example SQL schema above.
```

```
$ cat vschema.json
{
    "ks1": {
        "sharded": true,
        "vindexes": {
            "hash": {
                "type": "hash"
            }
        },
        "tables": {
            "user": {
                "column_vindexes": [
                    {
                        "column": "user_id",
                        "name": "hash"
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## 6. Run the VTExplain tool and capture the output

This step will generate the output you need to analyze to determine what queries may have issues with your proposed VSchema. It may take a long time to finish if you have a number of queries.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ sh -x run_vtexplain.sh 2> vtexplain.output
```

## 7. Check your output

> Once you have your full output in vtexplain.output you can use grep for ERROR to review any issues found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have your full output in vtexplain.output, use `grep` to search for the string "ERROR" to review any issues that VTExplain found.
```

### Example: Scatted across shards

> The following query is scattered across both shards, and then aggregated by vtgate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, VTGate scatters the example query across both shards, and then aggregates the query results.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ vtexplain -schema-file schema.sql -vschema-file vschema.json -shards 2 -sql 'SELECT * from user;'
----------------------------------------------------------------------

> SELECT * from user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM user
```

1 ks1/-80: select * from user limit 10001
1 ks1/80-: select * from user limit 10001
----------------------------------------------------------------------
```

> ### Example: Error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Query returns an error
```

> The following query produces an error because the AVG function isn't supported for scatter queries across multiple shards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following query produces an error because Vitess does not support the `AVG` function for scatter queries across multiple shards.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ vtexplain -schema-file schema.sql -vschema-file vschema.json -shards

> 2 -sql 'SELECT avg(balance) from user;'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2 -sql 'SELECT AVG(balance) FROM user;'
```

> ERROR: vtexplain execute error in 'SELECT avg(balance) from user':

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ERROR: vtexplain execute error in 'SELECT AVG(balance) FROM user':
```

unsupported: in scatter query: complex aggregate expression
```

> ### Example: Single shard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Targeting a single shard
```

The following query only targets a single shard because the query supplies the sharding key.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

$ vtexplain -schema-file schema.sql -vschema-file vschema.json -shards 2 -sql 'SELECT * from user where user_id = 100;'
----------------------------------------------------------------------

> SELECT * from user where user_id = 100

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM user WHERE user_id = 100
```

> 1 ks1/80-: select * from user where user_id = 100 limit 10001

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1 ks1/80-: SELECT * FROM user WHERE user_id = 100 limit 10001
```
